README.md, before:

# FilamentMeasuringTool
Filament Measuring Tool for 3D printing using Arduino.
Measure 1.75mm 3D printing Filament.

 ![MainPage](https://github.com/bmoniey/FilamentMeasuringTool/blob/main/gallery/fmt20_assy.png?raw=true)

## Design Targets

* Accuracy: 1mm over 1M
* Cost: <$20
* Easy to use. 

## ECAD

![ECAD](https://github.com/bmoniey/FilamentMeasuringTool/blob/main/design/ecad/fmt.svg)

## Branches

Currently there are two branches, main and protected.

* main: goes along with main Adrafruit_SSD1306 library.
* protected: goes along with custom fork of Adafruit_SSD1306 Library. See details below.

## Library Dependencies

Copy these libraries to your Arduino Libraries folder for the main or protected branch.

### Branch: main

* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_SSD1306.git
* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-GFX-Library.git
* https://github.com/Seeed-Studio/Seeed_Arduino_AS5600.git

### Branch: protected

* https://github.com/bmoniey/Adafruit_SSD1306/tree/protected
* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-GFX-Library.git
* https://github.com/Seeed-Studio/Seeed_Arduino_AS5600.git

## Links

* FMT on Grab CAD (step,stl there):https://grabcad.com/library/filament-measuring-tool-1
* Pylen:https://github.com/bmoniey/pylen
* Filament Welding tool:https://grabcad.com/library/3dprint-filament-welder-1
* bmoniey's Website:https://gear-blocks.com

## Bill of Material

- 1 Arduino Nano (ASIN B0713XK923)
- 1 AS5600 kit (PCB,magnet horizontal,5mmx2mm Amazon ASIN:B094F8H591)
- 1 OLED,128x64,I2C Display (ASIN B076PNP2VD)
- 4 M5 x 20 Socket Head Cap Screw
- 3 Ball Bearing,608,ABEC-9, 8x22x7 
- 4 Stand-off M3x10
- 4 Stand-off M2x5
- 1 PCB 50x70 (ASIN B081Q5JZ43)
- 2 header,male, horizontal,2.54mm 
- 2 Push-button, momentary
- x Dupont wire jumpers 20cm
- 1 housing_top, 3d printed
- 1 housing_bot, 3d printed
- 1 housing_front, 3d printed
- 1 Wheel, 3d printed
- 1 Snap-ring, 3d printed

## Usage

### Power

Use a USB C to Mini cable for power. Any USB C wall adapter or USB C port should work.
	
### Normal Mode (out of reset)

Will display units and the length with appropriate precision.

- Reset Button: Press to zero length readout.
- Units Button: Press to change between mm and inch
- Press reset and then press and hold units to enter calibration mode

### Calibration Mode:

Expects to record raw counts for 1000mm of filament. The display will show the raw position in counts.

Steps:
1. Zero the position at your measurement starting point with reset button
2. Draw out exactly 1000mm or 39.37in of filament (using a tape measure or other reference)
3. Press the units button (value must be non-zero. Negative values OK too!) to save new calibration
4. Press reset and then press and hold units to re-enter normal mode

- Reset Button: Press to zero length.  
- Units Button: Stores the calibration and returns to Normal Mode

## Version

### 1.0.0
- Failed attempt using an analog rotary encoder

### 2.0.0
- Initial Release of FMT20

### 2.1.0 
- store and read calibration from eeprom
- added calibration mode
- added updates to push-buttons to handle calibration mode

### 2.1.1
- removed unused variables and comments
- created defines for magic numbers
- improved handling of button presses
- improved entry and return from calibration mode

Commit message:

Notes added about using while cura is open

README.md, after:

# FilamentMeasuringTool
Filament Measuring Tool for 3D printing using Arduino.
Measure 1.75mm 3D printing Filament.

 ![MainPage](https://github.com/bmoniey/FilamentMeasuringTool/blob/main/gallery/fmt20_assy.png?raw=true)

## Design Targets

* Accuracy: 1mm over 1M
* Cost: <$20
* Easy to use. 

## ECAD

![ECAD](https://github.com/bmoniey/FilamentMeasuringTool/blob/main/design/ecad/fmt.svg)

## Branches

Currently there are two branches, main and protected.

* main: goes along with main Adrafruit_SSD1306 library.
* protected: goes along with custom fork of Adafruit_SSD1306 Library. See details below.

## Library Dependencies

Copy these libraries to your Arduino Libraries folder for the main or protected branch.

### Branch: main

* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_SSD1306.git
* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-GFX-Library.git
* https://github.com/Seeed-Studio/Seeed_Arduino_AS5600.git

### Branch: protected

* https://github.com/bmoniey/Adafruit_SSD1306/tree/protected
* https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-GFX-Library.git
* https://github.com/Seeed-Studio/Seeed_Arduino_AS5600.git

## Links

* FMT on Grab CAD (step,stl there):https://grabcad.com/library/filament-measuring-tool-1
* Pylen:https://github.com/bmoniey/pylen
* Filament Welding tool:https://grabcad.com/library/3dprint-filament-welder-1
* bmoniey's Website:https://gear-blocks.com

## Bill of Material

- 1 Arduino Nano (ASIN B0713XK923)
- 1 AS5600 kit (PCB,magnet horizontal,5mmx2mm Amazon ASIN:B094F8H591)
- 1 OLED,128x64,I2C Display (ASIN B076PNP2VD)
- 4 M5 x 20 Socket Head Cap Screw
- 3 Ball Bearing,608,ABEC-9, 8x22x7 
- 4 Stand-off M3x10
- 4 Stand-off M2x5
- 1 PCB 50x70 (ASIN B081Q5JZ43)
- 2 header,male, horizontal,2.54mm 
- 2 Push-button, momentary
- x Dupont wire jumpers 20cm
- 1 housing_top, 3d printed
- 1 housing_bot, 3d printed
- 1 housing_front, 3d printed
- 1 Wheel, 3d printed
- 1 Snap-ring, 3d printed

## Usage

### Power

Use a USB C to Mini cable for power. Any USB C wall adapter or USB C port should work.
	
### Normal Mode (out of reset)

Will display units and the length with appropriate precision.

- Reset Button: Press to zero length readout.
- Units Button: Press to change between mm and inch
- Press reset and then press and hold units to enter calibration mode

### Calibration Mode:

Expects to record raw counts for 1000mm of filament. The display will show the raw position in counts.

Steps:
1. Zero the position at your measurement starting point with reset button
2. Draw out exactly 1000mm or 39.37in of filament (using a tape measure or other reference)
3. Press the units button (value must be non-zero. Negative values OK too!) to save new calibration
4. Press reset and then press and hold units to re-enter normal mode

- Reset Button: Press to zero length.  
- Units Button: Stores the calibration and returns to Normal Mode

### Notes:
1. Using while Cura is open is not recommended. The software tries to access the serial port of the arduino and funny things can start to happen. Simple close Cura when using the device.

## Version

### 1.0.0
- Failed attempt using an analog rotary encoder

### 2.0.0
- Initial Release of FMT20

### 2.1.0 
- store and read calibration from eeprom
- added calibration mode
- added updates to push-buttons to handle calibration mode

### 2.1.1
- removed unused variables and comments
- created defines for magic numbers
- improved handling of button presses
- improved entry and return from calibration mode
